Objectives
==========

 - Understand the concepts of the conceptual data model and relational
   data model
 - Understand the process of normalization
 - Design a database using Entity-Relationship Diagram
 - Run simple query, nested query, and complex query

With any small amount of luck, we should receive a certification by the
end of class, no extra fees. This is done through ciw.ucertify.com

Lesson proper
=============

Database: A formally defined and arranged set of persistent information
stored by a computer program.

_Formally Arranged_: The format of the data and how it relates to itself
are clearly defined.

_Persistent_: The data should only undergo changes by an authorized user
or program, its integrity should not be compromised. 

Flat file databases stored all their information in one file, and
applications designed to interact with it would have much of that
structure baked into its program. Suffice to say, flat files = no bueno.

Other methods have come to the fore between flat-files and relational
databases.

Relational databases are designed to reduce redundancy, improve
consistency, and detach application logic from the database, among other
objectives.

A system catalog describes the database structure and format.

DBMS: DataBase Management System. Software which manages the data
through an interface, to the ends of improving concurrency, increasing
the ability to backup and restore, and through adherence to standards,
improving productivity. It comes with the costs of complexity, software
licensing fees, and the increased cost from failure.
